Add Xata guide to BE Recipe section (#3207)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/guides/backend/xata.mdx

> stub: true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stub: false
```

stub: true
---
import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro'
import FileTree from '~/components/FileTree.astro'

> [Xata](https://xata.io) is a **Serverless Data Platform** because it combines the features of a relational database, a search engine, and an analytics engine by exposing a single consistent REST API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Xata](https://xata.io) is a **Serverless Data Platform** that combines the features of a relational database, a search engine, and an analytics engine by exposing a single consistent REST API.
```

## Adding a database with Xata

### Prerequisites

> - A [Xata](https://app.xata.io/signin) account with a created database (you can use the sample database from the Web UI).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A [Xata](https://app.xata.io/signin) account with a created database. (You can use the sample database from the Web UI.)
```

- An Access Token (`XATA_TOKEN_API`).

> ### Environment configuration

Reviewer: So, I just want to be clear here, because we normally ONLY include the stuff required to make 3rd parties work with Astro: Is this environment config an *Astro-specific* configuration step, or is this something that Xata docs describe how to do to have Xata working with any project?

My gut feeling is that this is not something for this guide, but something that could be added as a pre-requisite line (i.e. Xata CLI configured globally, maybe with a link to Xata docs for this?)

These guides can get pretty long, and we try to include as little as possible that's (a) documented elsewhere and (b) subject to change in someone else's project that we wouldn't necessarily know about.

Author: Yes. It's not Xata specific. I was trying to follow the lead from the Firebase recipe. I'll add a note to the prerequisites about having the project linked to a DB and pointing to our docs. 

But I'll leave here the `env.d.ts` part because that's Astro specific and I think it could help, wdyt??

Reviewer: Yes, that was my initial thinking! It is Astro specific. Good instinct!

The quickest way to integrate is via the Xata CLI

<PackageManagerTabs>
  <Fragment slot="npm">
  ```shell
  npm install -g @xata.io/cli@latest
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="pnpm">
  ```shell
  pnpm add -g @xata.io/cli@latest
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="yarn">
  ```shell
  yarn global install @xata.io/cli@latest
  ```
  </Fragment>
</PackageManagerTabs>

The package will expose the `xata` command to your `$PATH` and now it's possible to initialize the integration:

```shell
xata init
```

:::note
You can just execute the binary with `npx`, `pnpm dlx`, or `yarn dlx` if preferred.
:::

Once you follow the prompt, you should have a `.env` file in the root of your project with the following variables defined:

```ini title=".env"
XATA_API_KEY=hash_key

# Xata branch that will be used
# if there's not a xata branch with

> #the same name as your git branch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# the same name as your git branch
```

XATA_FALLBACK_BRANCH=main
```

> To have IntelliSense for your environment variables, edit or create the file `env.d.ts` in your `/src` directory to make your environment variables type-safe:

Reviewer: This seems to me to be the important part of environment config, for an Astro project specifically? Maybe this is the only thing in this section (assuming it's easy enough to include setting up your environment as a prerequisite?)

Note: I might be wrong! You might need this entire section in order to integrate with Astro. If so, do let me know! I just know it's pretty common for people to PR guides that include setting up their *own* parts of the 3rd party, which is usually explained and doc'ed elsewhere. So, I need to check!  :smile:

Author: No no, absolutely right.

I'll just leave the `env.d.ts` part as a reassurance of how to use the env variables better with typescript in an Astro project, if that's alright. Wdyt?

```ts title="src/env.d.ts"
interface ImportMetaEnv {
  readonly XATA_API_KEY: string;
  readonly XATA_FALLBACK_BRANCH?: string;
}

interface ImportMeta {
  readonly env: ImportMetaEnv;
}
```

:::tip
Read more about [environment variables](/en/guides/environment-variables/) and `.env` files in Astro.
:::

And a `.xatarc` file with a `databaseURL`. Though it can be extended to have more definitions, such as the output path for your codegen, e.g.:

```json title=".xatarc"
{
  "databaseURL": "https://{{ Xata DB URL }}",
  "codegen": {
    "output": "src/xata.codegen.ts"
  }
}
```

> Additionally, the prompt may have assisted you on creating an instance of the SDK (Software Development Kit) and, if you chose TypeScript, you also have the types generated from your schema. Notice `@xata.io/client` was added to your `package.json` as well.

Reviewer 3: I believe here the preposition should be "in" instead.
```suggestion
Additionally, the prompt may have assisted you in creating an instance of the SDK (Software Development Kit) and, if you chose TypeScript, you also have the types generated from your schema. Notice `@xata.io/client` was added to your `package.json` as well.
```

Author: Great catch!! Thanks!

Finally, your project should have the following structure:

<FileTree title="Project Structure">
- src/
  - **xata.codegen.ts**
  - **env.d.ts**
- **.env**
- astro.config.mjs
- package.json
- **.xatarc**
</FileTree>

## Create your queries

> To illustrate how to make a query, let's query the first 50 posts from Xata's Sample Blog Database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To query your posts, import and use `getXataClient()` in a `.astro` file. The example below queries the first 50 posts from Xata's Sample Blog Database.
```
Just editing for tone/voice here, as per our Writing/style guide!

```astro title="src/pages/blog/index.astro"
---
import { getXataClient } from "../xata.codegen";

const xata = getXataClient();
const { records } = await xata.db.Posts.getPaginated({
  pagination: {
    size: 50
  }
})
---

<ul>
  {records.map(post) => (
    <li>{post.title}</li>
  )}
</ul>
```

> Since the SDK is generated dynamically, and will be updated any time you tweak your schema, it's better to leave it untouched. In case you wish to hoist a few common queries to keep your code base DRY, it's a best practice to create an additional file where your queries can be re-used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For common queries that you may wish to reuse, you can also create an additional file.
```
I'm not sure that was as helpful as getting to the instructive point sooner.  :smile: It's not as important to explain why, as to model the code that will help the reader be successful.  Can you add an example of a file here, including title, that holds a reusable query? I think that would be a great addition! Then, show a `.astro` file that uses one of these queries.

Author: My point was just to say "don't make changes to the generated code because once schema updates, your changes will be overwritten".

So how about I say _that_ instead of what I wrote initially?? 😅

> ## Different query strategies
> 
> As the Xata SDK connects directly to your database, it is important to never query from the client-side. As a matter of fact, the SDK access `process.env` and thus it will not even work.
> 
> :::caution
> Never import the Xata SDK into your client-side bundle.
> :::
> 
> So there are 3 ways to fetch your data from Xata in an Astro app:
> 
> 1. On-build time, in a prerendered page.
> 2. On-demand, in a [server-side rendered (SSR)](/en/guides/server-side-rendering/#enabling-ssr-in-your-project) page.
> 3. From the client-side with a Backend-For-Frontend (BFF) in the middle, such as a Serverless Function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I'm also going to suggest we remove this as not immediately helpful. If you only show approved/recommended usage, then that's much better for the reader. We typically would not include sections that are mostly just a big caution, do not do this.

However, if there is a key difference using Xata with SSR than a pre-rendered page, I think an SSR section makes sense here! If you'd like to show an example of using Xata with SSR, that's perfectly appropriate!

:::

If you used the codegeneration from the Xata CLI, you now have an instance of the SDK (Software Development Kit) generated for you, with types tailored to your database schema - if you chose TypeScript. Notice `@xata.io/client` was added to your `package.json` as well.

Your Xata environment variables and database url are automatically pulled by the SDK instance, so there's no more setup work needed.Finally, your project should have the following structure:

<FileTree title="Project Structure">
- src/
  - **xata.codegen.ts**
  - **env.d.ts**
- **.env**
- astro.config.mjs
- package.json
- **.xatarc**
</FileTree>

## Create your queries

To query your posts, import and use `getXataClient()` in a `.astro` file. The example below queries the first 50 posts from Xata's Sample Blog Database.

```astro title="src/pages/blog/index.astro"
---
import { getXataClient } from "../xata.codegen";

const xata = getXataClient();
const { records } = await xata.db.Posts.getPaginated({
  pagination: {
    size: 50
  }
})
---

<ul>
  {records.map(post) => (
    <li>{post.title}</li>
  )}
</ul>
```

> It's important to note the SDK needs to be regenerated everytime your schema changes. So, avoid making changes to the files the Xata CLI creates.

Reviewer: Let's give them that reason!

stub: true
---
import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro'
import FileTree from '~/components/FileTree.astro'

[Xata](https://xata.io) is a **Serverless Data Platform** that combines the features of a relational database, a search engine, and an analytics engine by exposing a single consistent REST API.

## Adding a database with Xata

### Prerequisites

- A [Xata](https://app.xata.io/signin) account with a created database. (You can use the sample database from the Web UI.)
- An Access Token (`XATA_TOKEN_API`).
- Your Database URL.

The quickest way to get an API token in your `.env` file and the database url ready to sync your project, is to update and initialize the [Xata CLI](https://xata.io/docs/getting-started/installation). 

By the end of the setup, you should have:

```ini title=".env"
XATA_API_KEY=hash_key

# Xata branch that will be used
# if there's not a xata branch with
# the same name as your git branch
XATA_FALLBACK_BRANCH=main
```

And the `databaseURL` defined:

> ```ini title=".xatarc
> {
>   "databaseUrl": "https://your-database-url"
> }
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```ini title=".xatarc"
{
  "databaseUrl": "https://your-database-url"
}
```
```
